[DOCS] Refactor quick start guide and README (#71331)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/getting-started.asciidoc

[chapter]
[[getting-started]]
= Quick start

This guide helps beginners learn how to:

> * Install and run {es} in a test environment

Author: Aggs are important, but I don't know if they're mission-critical for a quick start. I see them mostly as the powerhouse behind Kibana visualizations.

I do include a link to "Common search options" below, which highlights aggregations. It also worth noting that the quick start doesn't include some other big search features, like pagination. There just isn't enough room while keeping this lean.

> * Install and run {es} in a test environment

Author: I gave this some more thought and decided to re-add an smallish agg example with d9cf659d0ff.

* Add data to {es}
* Search and sort data
* Extract fields from unstructured content during a search

> We do not recommend using this guide to set up a self-managed production

Author: Good call. I'll remove this.

deployment. To install and configure {es} in production, see
<<install-elasticsearch>> and <<settings>>.

[discrete]
[[run-elasticsearch]]
=== Step 1. Run {es}

The best way to run {es} is our hosted {ess} on {ecloud}. If needed, you can
also run and self-manage {es} on your own infrastructure.

include::{es-repo-dir}/tab-widgets/code.asciidoc[]
include::{es-repo-dir}/tab-widgets/quick-start-install-widget.asciidoc[]

[discrete]
[[make-api-call]]

> === Step 2. Make an API call

Author: I think "Say hello to {es}" is a bit too vague and cutesy. I want to highlight APIs here. Happy to change the title, but I'd like to keep "API" or something like it in there.

> === Step 2. Make an API call

Reviewer: Maybe "Send requests to Elasticsearch"? _Make_ just seems like a really weak verb. :-)

You send data and other requests to {es} using REST APIs. This lets you interact
with {es} using any client that sends HTTP requests, such as
https://curl.se[curl]. You can also use {kib}'s console to make API calls.

include::{es-repo-dir}/tab-widgets/api-call-widget.asciidoc[]

[discrete]
[[add-data]]
=== Step 3. Add data

You add data to {es} as JSON objects called documents. {es} stores these
documents in searchable indices. For time series data, you typically add data

> to <<data-streams,data streams>> made up of multiple auto-generated indices.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. I'll incorporate a variation of this.

The following <<docs-index_,index API>> request adds a JSON document containing
a `@timestamp` and a log message, `event.original`, to a test data stream named
`logs-my_app-default`. Since `logs-my_app-default` doesn't exist, the request

> automatically creates it.

Author: Thanks. I'll include a variation of this suggestion.

A data stream requires a matching <<create-index-template,index template>>. This
stream uses a built-in template for the `logs-*-*` pattern. Data streams also
require documents contain a `@timestamp` field.

[source,console]
----
POST logs-my_app-default/_doc
{
  "@timestamp": "2099-05-06T16:21:15.000Z",
  "event": {
    "original": "192.0.2.42 - - [06/May/2099:16:21:15 +0000] \"GET /images/bg.jpg HTTP/1.0\" 200 24736"
  }
}
----
// TEST[s/_doc/_doc?refresh=wait_for/]

The response includes metadata that {es} generates for the document:

* The `_index` of the data stream that stores the document. For data streams,
  the index name is automatically generated.
* An `_id` that is unique to the document within an index.

[source,console-result]
----
{
  "_index": ".ds-logs-my_app-default-2099-05-06-000001",
  "_id": "gl5MJXMBMk1dGnErnBW8",
  "_version": 1,
  "result": "created",
  "_shards": {
    "total": 2,
    "successful": 1,
    "failed": 0
  },
  "_seq_no": 0,
  "_primary_term": 1
}
----
// TESTRESPONSE[s/"_index": ".ds-logs-my_app-default-2099-05-06-000001"/"_index": $body._index/]
// TESTRESPONSE[s/"_id": "gl5MJXMBMk1dGnErnBW8"/"_id": $body._id/]

[discrete]
[[add-bulk-data]]

> === Step 4. Add bulk data

Author: Thanks. I originally did this for the index and search sections, but changed it due to TOC visibility. However, I think I like it they way you suggest better now. Probably over-thought it. 😄

To add a large number of documents in one request, use the <<docs-bulk,bulk
API>>. Bulk data must be newline-delimited JSON (NDJSON). Each line must end in
a newline character (`\n`), including the last line.

[source,console]
----
PUT logs-my_app-default/_bulk
{ "create": { } }
{ "@timestamp": "2099-05-07T16:24:32.000Z", "event": { "original": "192.0.2.242 - - [07/May/2020:16:24:32 -0500] \"GET /images/hm_nbg.jpg HTTP/1.0\" 304 0" } }
{ "create": { } }
{ "@timestamp": "2099-05-08T16:25:42.000Z", "event": { "original": "192.0.2.255 - - [08/May/2099:16:25:42 +0000] \"GET /favicon.ico HTTP/1.0\" 200 3638" } }
----
// TEST[continued]
// TEST[s/_bulk/_bulk?refresh=wait_for/]

[discrete]
[[qs-search-data]]
=== Step 5. Search data

Indexed documents are available for search in near real-time. Use the

> <<search-search,search API>> to search your indexed data.

Author: The first sentence of your suggestion is passive voice. I kinda like mine better. I'll use the second sentence tho.

    }
  ]
}
----
// TEST[continued]

The response contains each hit's `fields` values as a flat array.

[source,console-result]
----
{
  "took": 8,
  "timed_out": false,
  "_shards": {
    "total": 1,
    "successful": 1,
    "skipped": 0,
    "failed": 0
  },
  "hits": {
    "total": {
      "value": 3,
      "relation": "eq"
    },
    "max_score": null,
    "hits": [
      {
        "_index": ".ds-logs-my_app-default-2099-05-06-000001",
        "_id": "PdjWongB9KPnaVm2IyaL",
        "_score": null,
        "fields": {
          "@timestamp": [
            "2099-05-08T16:25:42.000Z"
          ]
        },
        "sort": [
          4081940742000
        ]
      },
      ...
    ]
  }
}
----
// TESTRESPONSE[s/"took": 8/"took": $body.took/]
// TESTRESPONSE[s/"_index": ".ds-logs-my_app-default-2099-05-06-000001"/"_index": $body.hits.hits.0._index/]
// TESTRESPONSE[s/"_id": "PdjWongB9KPnaVm2IyaL"/"_id": $body.hits.hits.0._id/]
// TESTRESPONSE[s/\.\.\./$body.hits.hits.1,$body.hits.hits.2/]

[discrete]
[[search-date-range]]
=== Step 7. Search a date range

The `query` parameter supports several <<query-dsl,Query DSL>> query types. To
search across a specific time or IP range, use a

> <<query-dsl-range-query,`range`>> query.

Author: Good suggestion. Not worth getting into this here. I'll link to more search options at the bottom of the guide.

[source,console]
----
GET logs-my_app-default/_search
{
  "query": {
    "range": {
      "@timestamp": {
        "gte": "2099-05-05",
        "lt": "2099-05-08"
      }
    }
  },
  "fields": [
    "@timestamp"
  ],
  "_source": false,
  "sort": [
    {
      "@timestamp": "desc"
    }
  ]
}
----
// TEST[continued]

Use <<date-math,date math>> to define relative time ranges. The following
search will match not any documents in `logs-my_app-default`.

[source,console]
----
GET logs-my_app-default/_search
{
  "query": {
    "range": {
      "@timestamp": {
        "gte": "now-1d/d",
        "lt": "now/d"
      }
    }
  },
  "fields": [
    "@timestamp"
  ],
  "_source": false,
  "sort": [
    {
      "@timestamp": "desc"
    }
  ]
}
----
// TEST[continued]

[discrete]
[[extract-fields]]
=== Step 8. Extract fields from unstructured content

Use a <<runtime-search-request,runtime field>> containing a
<<modules-scripting-painless,Painless script>> and <<grok-basics,grok patterns>>
to extract fields from unstructured content, such as log messages. Include the
extracted field names in the `fields` parameter.

The following search uses the `runtime_mappings` parameter to extract the

> `source.ip` address from the `event.original` field.

Author: Ugh. I'm still kinda figuring out how to not write about runtime fields awkwardly. I kinda want to avoid introducing the concept of mappings here. I'll tinker with this and update. Thanks for calling this out!

[source,console]
----
GET logs-my_app-default/_search
{
  "runtime_mappings": {
    "source.ip": {
      "type": "ip",
      "script": """
        String sourceip=grok('%{IPORHOST:sourceip} .*').extract(doc[ "event.original" ].value)?.sourceip;
        if (sourceip != null) emit(sourceip);
      """
    }
  },
  "query": {
    "range": {
      "@timestamp": {
        "gte": "2099-05-05",
        "lt": "2099-05-08"
      }
    }
  },
  "fields": [
    "@timestamp",
    "source.ip"
  ],
  "_source": false,
  "sort": [
    {
      "@timestamp": "desc"
    }
  ]
}
----
// TEST[continued]

[discrete]
[[combine-queries-sorts]]
=== Step 9. Combine queries and sorts

To combine multiple queries, use the <<query-dsl-bool-query,`bool` query>>. The
following search uses a `bool` query to combine multiple queries, including a
`range` query on the `source.ip` runtime field. The search also sorts results by

> `source.ip`.

Author: Thanks for calling this out. The example _is_ a little boring, but I think that's okay. It's supposed to be a simple demo... almost like a POC.

I don't think most folks in a time series use case are going to use relevance scoring at all. I'd like to avoid introducing that concept here. If folks want to dig deeper into the `bool` query, they can check out the link in the following section.

[source,console]
----
GET logs-my_app-default/_search
{
  "runtime_mappings": {
    "source.ip": {
      "type": "ip",
      "script": """
        String sourceip=grok('%{IPORHOST:sourceip} .*').extract(doc[ "event.original" ].value)?.sourceip;
        if (sourceip != null) emit(sourceip);
      """
    }
  },
  "query": {
    "bool": {
      "filter": [
        {
          "range": {
            "@timestamp": {
              "gte": "2099-05-05",
              "lt": "2099-05-08"
            }
          }
        },
        {
          "range": {
            "source.ip": {
              "gte": "192.0.2.0",
              "lte": "192.0.2.240"
            }
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  },
  "fields": [
    "@timestamp",
    "source.ip"
  ],
  "_source": false,
  "sort": [
    {

>       "@timestamp": "desc",

Author: Good call. I'll remove it.

      "source.ip": "desc"
    }
  ]
}
----
// TEST[continued]

[discrete]
[[clean-up]]
=== Step 10. Delete data

Index more data to your data stream and explore the search options in outlined
in <<search-your-data>>. When you're done, use the
<<indices-delete-data-stream,delete data stream API>> to delete your test data

> stream and it backing indices.

Author: Yeah. This should be two sections, and I should break out the cleanup by deployment type. Thanks for pointing this out.

[source,console]
----
DELETE _data_stream/logs-my_app-default
----
// TEST[continued]

[discrete]
[[stop-remove-docker-containers]]
=== Step 11. Stop and remove your Docker containers

TIP: If you're using {ess}, skip this step.

If you're using Docker to run {es} or {kib}, run the following command in a new
terminal session to stop the containers.

[source,sh]
----
docker stop es01-test
docker stop kib01-test
----

To remove the containers, run:

[source,sh]
----
docker rm es01-test
docker rm kib01-test
----

[discrete]
[[whats-next]]
=== What's next?

> 

Author: Good call. I'll remove the first bullet.

runtime field.

[source,console]
----
GET logs-my_app-default/_search
{
  "runtime_mappings": {
    "source.ip": {
      "type": "ip",
      "script": """
        String sourceip=grok('%{IPORHOST:sourceip} .*').extract(doc[ "event.original" ].value)?.sourceip;
        if (sourceip != null) emit(sourceip);
      """
    }
  },
  "query": {
    "bool": {
      "filter": [
        {
          "range": {
            "@timestamp": {
              "gte": "2099-05-05",
              "lt": "2099-05-08"
            }
          }
        },
        {
          "range": {
            "source.ip": {
              "gte": "192.0.2.0",
              "lte": "192.0.2.240"
            }
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  },
  "fields": [
    "@timestamp",
    "source.ip"
  ],
  "_source": false,
  "sort": [
    {
      "@timestamp": "desc"
    }
  ]
}
----
// TEST[continued]

[discrete]
[[aggregate-data]]
==== Aggregate data

Use aggregations to summarize data as metrics, statistics, or other analytics.

The following search uses an aggregation to calculate the
`average_response_size` using the `http.response.body.bytes` runtime field. The

> aggregation only runs on documents matching the `query`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
aggregation only runs on documents that match the `query`.
```
